pages/user/server_authentication.mdx, before:

# Server Authentication

Authentication is using the Opaque protocol. The `finishLogin` function results in a `sessionKey` which is visible to the server as well as the client.

On the server an entry in the `Session` table is created. It contains the `sessionKey` as well as a foreign key to the `Device` and an expiration date. For the iOS, Android and desktop clients are far in the future (1000 years).

TODO add information about expiration dates of web client sessions (check if there is proper validation regarding the max expiration sent by a web client)

TODO add information about session/device relationship including device revocation also resulting in a session revocation

TODO link to the Schema, finishLogin mutation and the authenticate function

## Possible Improvement

In our threat model we assume a HTTPS connection to the server is secure and can't be intercepted. This assumption could be reduces (not eliminated) by encrypting each request to a server and response back to the client with the `session_key`.

For example the client could use the `session_key` to encrypt & MAC the request body. In addition a UTC timestamp could be added and make sure neither the client nor the server accept a request older than 4 hours or in the future and therefor prevent replay attacks.

Commit message:

document websocket security and open questions

pages/user/server_authentication.mdx, after:

# Server Authentication

Authentication is using the Opaque protocol. The `finishLogin` function results in a `sessionKey` which is visible to the server as well as the client.

On the server an entry in the `Session` table is created. It contains the `sessionKey` as well as a foreign key to the `Device` and an expiration date. For the iOS, Android and desktop clients are far in the future (1000 years).

TODO add information about expiration dates of web client sessions (check if there is proper validation regarding the max expiration sent by a web client)

TODO add information about session/device relationship including device revocation also resulting in a session revocation

TODO link to the Schema, finishLogin mutation and the authenticate function

## Websocket Connections

For the staging and production environments a `wss` connection is required. The websocket connection is authenticated by sending the `sessionKey` as a query parameter.

```js
`${host}/${docId}?sessionKey=${sessionKey}`;
```

## Possible Improvement

In our threat model we assume a HTTPS connection to the server is secure and can't be intercepted. This assumption could be reduces (not eliminated) by encrypting each request to a server and response back to the client with the `session_key`.

For example the client could use the `session_key` to encrypt & MAC the request body. In addition a UTC timestamp could be added and make sure neither the client nor the server accept a request older than 4 hours or in the future and therefor prevent replay attacks.
