pages/cryptography/document-chain.mdx, before:

# Document Chain

Each document has a document-chain to determine which share devices have been created. A share device is a device that is provided to an external user to interact only with this specific document. These entries can be revoked manually, but also expire based on the expiredAt property. In addition a role must be defined to determine the permissions of the share device. The role can be one of the following:

- viewer
- commenter
- editor

Only a workspace owner or editor can create a share device.

The chain is supposed to be immutable. Items can't be reordered and no forks are allowed. In case a fork is dedected the chain is considered invalid.

The chain is a series of events where each event contains a

- transaction
  - type
  - version
  - previous event hash
  - … custom props depending on the type
- author
  - publicKey
  - signature of the combined transaction hash and the previous transaction hash

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/tree/main/packages/document-chain/src

Based on the document-chain a current state of the active share devices can be determined for each event.

## Cryptographic Dependencies and actual implementation

- generate_id: `sodium.to_base64(sodium.randombytes_buf(24))`
- hash: `sodium.to_base64(sodium.crypto_generichash(64, message))`
- canonicalize: predictable canocalization of JSON as defined by RFC8785 https://www.npmjs.com/package/canonicalize
- sign: `sodium.crypto_sign_detached(message, privateKey)`
- signVerify: `sodium.crypto_sign_detached(signature, message, publicKey)`

## Available Transaction Types

- createDocumentChain
- addDocumentShareDevice
- removeDocumentShareDevice

## Device structure

- signingPublicKey
- encryptionPublicKey
- encryptionPublicKeySignature (context prefix: `share_document_device_encryption_public_key`)

## Overview of state after a chain has been processed

- id
- devices
- removedDevices
- eventHash
- eventVersion // for protocol versioning

## Creating any chain event

```ts
transaction = {
  prevEventHash, // is null for the createChain event
  …
}
transactionHash = hash(canonicalize(transaction));
signature = sign(transactionHash, privateKey);
```

## Cryptographic validation for all chain events

```ts
transactionHash = hash(canonicalize(transaction));
signVerify(author.signature, transactionHash, author.publicKey);
```

This allows to validate:

- the transaction is authenticated by the author
- the transaction is not modified

For the createDocumentChain event the prevEventHash is null. For all other events it must be defined. Once provided it results in the following properties:

- the previousEventHash is authenticated by the author
- the previousEventHash is not modified

## Transaction Types and Validations

### Create chain

```ts
transaction = {
  type: "create",
  id: generateId(),
  prevEventHash: null,
  version,
};
```

The `id` is to identify the document by ID.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/createDocumentChain.ts

Validations:

- has a signingPublicKey, encryptionPublicKey and valid encryptionPublicKeySignature for the main device `signVerify(encryptionPublicKeySignature, encryptionPublicKey, signingPublicKey)`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyCreateDocumentChainEvent.ts

### Add Share Document Device

Adds a device to the document. `signingPublicKey`, `encryptionPublicKey` and `role` are required parameters, while `expiresAt` is optional. The idea behind expiresAt is that you can add short lived devices and each client, but also the server can check that expired devices are not included in e.g. workspace key rotations.

In order to prevent drifts between clients the device session for example expires earlier than the expiredAt.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/addShareDocumentDevice.ts

Validations:

- the device does not exist in the state derived until the event
- has a signingPublicKey, encryptionPublicKey and valid encryptionPublicKeySignature `signVerify(encryptionPublicKeySignature, encryptionPublicKey, signingPublicKey)`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L62-L79

Note: When invoking this function it must be verified that the author has the required permissions to add a device (`EDITOR` | `ADMIN`). This is not part of the chain validation.

### Remove Device

Removes a device based on the provided `signingPublicKey`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/removeShareDocumentDevice.ts

Validations:

- the device does exist in the state derived until the event

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L81-L95

Note: When invoking this function it must be verified that the author has the required permissions to add a device (`EDITOR` | `ADMIN`). This is not part of the chain validation.

## Versioning

Each transaction includes a version of the protocol. Once the version has been increased by one transaction it can't go lower anymore. This means every client must have the same or a higher version than the last transaction in the chain otherwise the chain is considered invalid.

It also fails in case the version is higher than the currently known to prevent the chain being processed by an older client.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L43-L54

## App Integration

Whenever a new document is created a new document chain is created with it: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/pull/806/files

TODO reference the first documentChain hash in every snapshot to bind those two together

## Miscellaneous

All types are documented here: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/types.ts

Commit message:

add document share link integration into the chain

pages/cryptography/document-chain.mdx, after:

# Document Chain

Each document has a document-chain to determine which share devices have been created. A share device is a device that is provided to an external user to interact only with this specific document. These entries can be revoked manually, but also expire based on the expiredAt property. In addition a role must be defined to determine the permissions of the share device. The role can be one of the following:

- viewer
- commenter
- editor

Only a workspace owner or editor can create a share device.

The chain is supposed to be immutable. Items can't be reordered and no forks are allowed. In case a fork is dedected the chain is considered invalid.

The chain is a series of events where each event contains a

- transaction
  - type
  - version
  - previous event hash
  - … custom props depending on the type
- author
  - publicKey
  - signature of the combined transaction hash and the previous transaction hash

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/tree/main/packages/document-chain/src

Based on the document-chain a current state of the active share devices can be determined for each event.

## Cryptographic Dependencies and actual implementation

- generate_id: `sodium.to_base64(sodium.randombytes_buf(24))`
- hash: `sodium.to_base64(sodium.crypto_generichash(64, message))`
- canonicalize: predictable canocalization of JSON as defined by RFC8785 https://www.npmjs.com/package/canonicalize
- sign: `sodium.crypto_sign_detached(message, privateKey)`
- signVerify: `sodium.crypto_sign_detached(signature, message, publicKey)`

## Available Transaction Types

- createDocumentChain
- addDocumentShareDevice
- removeDocumentShareDevice

## Device structure

- signingPublicKey
- encryptionPublicKey
- encryptionPublicKeySignature (context prefix: `share_document_device_encryption_public_key`)

## Overview of state after a chain has been processed

- id
- devices
- removedDevices
- eventHash
- eventVersion // for protocol versioning

## Creating any chain event

```ts
transaction = {
  prevEventHash, // is null for the createChain event
  …
}
transactionHash = hash(canonicalize(transaction));
signature = sign(transactionHash, privateKey);
```

## Cryptographic validation for all chain events

```ts
transactionHash = hash(canonicalize(transaction));
signVerify(author.signature, transactionHash, author.publicKey);
```

This allows to validate:

- the transaction is authenticated by the author
- the transaction is not modified

For the createDocumentChain event the prevEventHash is null. For all other events it must be defined. Once provided it results in the following properties:

- the previousEventHash is authenticated by the author
- the previousEventHash is not modified

## Transaction Types and Validations

### Create chain

```ts
transaction = {
  type: "create",
  id: generateId(),
  prevEventHash: null,
  version,
};
```

The `id` is to identify the document by ID.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/createDocumentChain.ts

Validations:

- has a signingPublicKey, encryptionPublicKey and valid encryptionPublicKeySignature for the main device `signVerify(encryptionPublicKeySignature, encryptionPublicKey, signingPublicKey)`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyCreateDocumentChainEvent.ts

### Add Share Document Device

Adds a device to the document. `signingPublicKey`, `encryptionPublicKey` and `role` are required parameters, while `expiresAt` is optional. The idea behind expiresAt is that you can add short lived devices and each client, but also the server can check that expired devices are not included in e.g. workspace key rotations.

In order to prevent drifts between clients the device session for example expires earlier than the expiredAt.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/addShareDocumentDevice.ts

Validations:

- the device does not exist in the state derived until the event
- has a signingPublicKey, encryptionPublicKey and valid encryptionPublicKeySignature `signVerify(encryptionPublicKeySignature, encryptionPublicKey, signingPublicKey)`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L62-L79

Note: When invoking this function it must be verified that the author has the required permissions to add a device (`EDITOR` | `ADMIN`). This is not part of the chain validation.

### Remove Device

Removes a device based on the provided `signingPublicKey`

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/removeShareDocumentDevice.ts

Validations:

- the device does exist in the state derived until the event

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L81-L95

Note: When invoking this function it must be verified that the author has the required permissions to add a device (`EDITOR` | `ADMIN`). This is not part of the chain validation.

## Versioning

Each transaction includes a version of the protocol. Once the version has been increased by one transaction it can't go lower anymore. This means every client must have the same or a higher version than the last transaction in the chain otherwise the chain is considered invalid.

It also fails in case the version is higher than the currently known to prevent the chain being processed by an older client.

https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/applyEvent.ts#L43-L54

## App Integration

Whenever a new document is created a new document chain is created with it: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/pull/806/files

This PR added querying the documentChain, adding and removing share links: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/pull/807

TODO reference the first documentChain hash in every snapshot to bind those two together

## Miscellaneous

All types are documented here: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/packages/document-chain/src/types.ts
