pages/cryptography/introduction.mdx, before:

# Introduction

## Definitions

User: Is an entity representing a person who can use the system.

Client: Is an instance of the software that is used by a user to interact with the system.

Server: Is a centralized service that is responsible for storing and exchanging data between client.

## Security Model

The main objective of the whole project is to create a system where the server can never access the content or name of a folder or document. The assumes that the code the client is executing is not compromised.

The server has a lot of meta-data. The aim is to minimize the amount of meta-data in the future, but ideally keep all the verifications in place using zero-knowledge proofs.

Clients must trust other verified clients with the encryption. A malicious client can leak data or in worst case create malicious data that could prevent other clients from decrypting the content.

What can't be prevented is that the server will hide data from a user. A server could even fork a workspace, but once that happens the participansts of each for can't work together anymore since the chain verifications would dedect the fork.

## Client Responsibilities

- Authenticate changes to chains & encryptions before presenting data to the user
- Inform the user on malicious activity and set the respective document or workspace to read-only

## Server Responsibilities

- Register new users
- Authenticate users
- Authorization when accessing data
- Authorization and validation before writing it to the database
  - This excludes validation of encrypted data since the server should never be able to decrypt data belonging to a user.
  - Validation means
    - Verifying signatures
    - Ensuring that all signature chains (user, workspace and document) are in the correct order and no forks are created.

## Keys encryption

Keys should be encrypted as Uint8Array

Example:

```ts
sodium.crypto_box_easy(workspaceKey, nonce, publicKey, privateKey);
```

In the case above the workspaceKey must be a `Uint8Array`.

### Key Separation

Two symmetric enryption keys are encrypted using asymmetric encryption (secret_box). Specifically:

- Workspace key
- Share document device Key (used for sharing documents via a link)

In order to make sure these keys are not mistaken with each other they are prefixed with a context byte (0x01 for workspace and 0x02 for share document).

TODO Note this is not implemented yet everywhere

## Signatures

The content to ge signed should always be encrypted as strings

The reason here is that signatures often include other data as well end it's easier to stay consistent and always use strings. In addition every string must be prefixed with the domain context to make sure signatures can't be misused for other use-cases.

### Signature Domain Context

- Workspace chain entry: TODO
- User chain entry: TODO
- Document chain entry: TODO
- Device encryptionPublicKey: `user_device_encryption_public_key`
- Share document device encryptionPublicKey: `share_document_device_encryption_public_key`
- sessionTokenSignature: `login_session_key`
- Folder ID signature: `folder_id`

## Code separation

There is a clear separation between the server and client code to ensure a compromised server can't trick a client in breaking the security model.

- Server code is deployed on fly.io
- Client code is a static build and deployed on Netlify

## Miscellaneous

## Why is not one chain (basically signed event sourcing) used for a workspace incl. all members, devices, folders, documents?

The benefit is very clear. The server could not hide single documents from a user and the complexity would be drastically reduced.

This benefit though comes with a downside:

- It's not possible to drastically reduce the amount of entries to that need to be processed to show a signle document.
- Granular access would not be possible e.g. if a user only gets access to a single document though could not verify everything in the workspace chain without exposing it.

## Possible Improvements

The whole design was made with the intention to offer a secure system based on established cryptography concepts. In addition the goal was to keep the complexity for the user as low as possible and offer a good user experience.

There are many possible improvements and we plan to incorporate them in the future. Suggestions are very welcome.

Commit message:

add content for client/server and kdf context

pages/cryptography/introduction.mdx, after:

# Introduction

## Definitions

User: Is an entity representing a person who can use the system.

Client: Is an instance of the software that is used by a user to interact with the system.

Server: Is a centralized service that is responsible for storing and exchanging data between client.

## Security Model

The main objective of the whole project is to create a system where the server can never access the content or name of a folder or document. The assumes that the code the client is executing is not compromised.

The server has a lot of meta-data. The aim is to minimize the amount of meta-data in the future, but ideally keep all the verifications in place using zero-knowledge proofs.

Clients must trust other verified clients with the encryption. A malicious client can leak data or in worst case create malicious data that could prevent other clients from decrypting the content.

What can't be prevented is that the server will hide data from a user. A server could even fork a workspace, but once that happens the participansts of each for can't work together anymore since the chain verifications would dedect the fork.

## Client Responsibilities

- Authenticate changes to chains & encryptions before presenting data to the user
- Inform the user on malicious activity and set the respective document or workspace to read-only

## Server Responsibilities

- Register new users
- Authenticate users
- Authorization when accessing data
- Authorization and validation before writing it to the database
  - This excludes validation of encrypted data since the server should never be able to decrypt data belonging to a user.
  - Validation means
    - Verifying signatures
    - Ensuring that all signature chains (user, workspace and document) are in the correct order and no forks are created.

## Keys encryption

Keys should be encrypted as Uint8Array

Example:

```ts
sodium.crypto_box_easy(workspaceKey, nonce, publicKey, privateKey);
```

In the case above the workspaceKey must be a `Uint8Array`.

### Key Separation

Two symmetric enryption keys are encrypted using asymmetric encryption (secret_box). Specifically:

- Workspace key
- Share document device Key (used for sharing documents via a link)

In order to make sure these keys are not mistaken with each other they are prefixed with a context byte (0x01 for workspace and 0x02 for share document).

TODO Note this is yet not implemented

### KDF Context

Each key that is derived using a KDF has a context set depending on the purpose of the key:

- `m_device` - mainDevice encryption key based on the exportKey
- `wsinvite` - workspaceInvitation encryption key
- `folder__` - folder encryption key
- `snapshot` - document snapshot encryption key
- `doctitle` - document title encryption key
- `comment_` - document comment encryption key

Note: The libsodium documention states that the context is a 8 character string. This is currently not enforced by libsodium.js. See h[https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium.js/issues/322](https://github.com/jedisct1/libsodium.js/issues/322).

## Signatures

The content to ge signed should always be encrypted as strings

The reason here is that signatures often include other data as well end it's easier to stay consistent and always use strings. In addition every string must be prefixed with the domain context to make sure signatures can't be misused for other use-cases.

### Signature Domain Context

- Workspace chain entry: TODO
- User chain entry: TODO
- Document chain entry: TODO
- Device encryptionPublicKey: `user_device_encryption_public_key`
- Share document device encryptionPublicKey: `share_document_device_encryption_public_key`
- sessionTokenSignature: `login_session_key`
- Folder ID signature: `folder_id`

## Code separation

There is a clear separation between the server and client code to ensure a compromised server can't trick a client in breaking the security model.

- Server code is deployed on fly.io
- Client code is a static build and deployed on Netlify

## Miscellaneous

## Why is not one chain (basically signed event sourcing) used for a workspace incl. all members, devices, folders, documents?

The benefit is very clear. The server could not hide single documents from a user and the complexity would be drastically reduced.

This benefit though comes with a downside:

- It's not possible to drastically reduce the amount of entries to that need to be processed to show a signle document.
- Granular access would not be possible e.g. if a user only gets access to a single document though could not verify everything in the workspace chain without exposing it.

## Possible Improvements

The whole design was made with the intention to offer a secure system based on established cryptography concepts. In addition the goal was to keep the complexity for the user as low as possible and offer a good user experience.

There are many possible improvements and we plan to incorporate them in the future. Suggestions are very welcome.
