pages/cryptography/secure-client-storage.mdx, before:

# Secure Client Storage

The following information should be stored in there:

- device private keys (signing and encryption)
- sessionKey (OPAQUE)
- unencrypted content (folder names, document titles, document names)
- chain events (workspace-chains, user-chains, document-chains)

Therefor an encrypted SQLite database is used. Specifically https://github.com/sqlcipher/sqlcipher which is encrypted with one master key. The master key is stored in a secure storage supported by a Secure Element. If no such storage is available no data is stored locally.

All code related to the SQLite database integration can be found in this folder https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/tree/main/apps/app/store. Currently SQLCipher is not integrated in any environment and therefor only an in-memory database is used for local state.

## Desktop clients

For the desktop devices https://github.com/signalapp/better-sqlite3 is used. It is a SQLCipher implementation working in Electron.

To store the master key electron offers a https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest/api/safe-storage and integrates with the macOS Keychain and Windows Credential Manager on Windows.

### iOS and Android

For the mobile devices (ReactNative) currently there is no secure implementation and we are looking into forking https://github.com/margelo/react-native-quick-sqlite to support SQLCipher.

The `expo-secure-store` package is used to store a `Device` using Keychain on iOS and KeyStore on Android. Both leverage a Secure Element to keep the data secure.

Code reference: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/apps/app/utils/device/deviceStore.ts

### Web

Since in a web client no secure storage available, it's not planned to store data locally. Possibly hashes of the chains (e.g. workspace-chain) could be stored, but this has not yet been decided.

The browser's LocalStorage is used to store a device private keys and sessionKey. This is not as secure as other storage options, but it's the only option available. To reduce the risk an expiration data is set.

Code reference: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/apps/app/utils/device/webDeviceStore.ts

## Web client

## Current state

As of today only the private keys and sessionToken are stored in the secure storage and no other data is stored locally.

Commit message:

align docs with new strategy for webDevices and clarify authentication

pages/cryptography/secure-client-storage.mdx, after:

# Secure Client Storage

The following information should be stored in there:

- device private keys (signing and encryption)
- sessionKey (OPAQUE)
- unencrypted content (folder names, document titles, document names)
- chain events (workspace-chains, user-chains, document-chains)

Therefor an encrypted SQLite database is used. Specifically https://github.com/sqlcipher/sqlcipher which is encrypted with one master key. The master key is stored in a secure storage supported by a Secure Element. If no such storage is available no data is stored locally.

All code related to the SQLite database integration can be found in this folder https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/tree/main/apps/app/store. Currently SQLCipher is not integrated in any environment and therefor only an in-memory database is used for local state.

## Desktop clients

For the desktop devices https://github.com/signalapp/better-sqlite3 is used. It is a SQLCipher implementation working in Electron.

To store the master key electron offers a https://www.electronjs.org/docs/latest/api/safe-storage and integrates with the macOS Keychain and Windows Credential Manager on Windows.

### iOS and Android

For the mobile devices (ReactNative) currently there is no secure implementation and we are looking into forking https://github.com/margelo/react-native-quick-sqlite to support SQLCipher.

The `expo-secure-store` package is used to store a `Device` using Keychain on iOS and KeyStore on Android. Both leverage a Secure Element to keep the data secure.

Code reference: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/apps/app/utils/device/deviceStore.ts

### Web

Since in a web client no secure storage available and therefor no content is persistet on the client. Possibly hashes of the chains (e.g. workspace-chain) could be stored, but this is not implemented and no decision in favor of it has been made.

Also device private keys are not stored locally. The only data that is stored locally is the sessionKey, webDeviceAccessToken and a webDeviceKey. The webDeviceKey is used to encrypt the web device (incl. private signing and encryption key) and stored on the server when adding the device to the account.

When a user open the application the webDeviceAccessToken is used to fetch the encrypted device and decrypt it with the webDeviceKey. The decrypted device is then stored only in memory and will be gone after closing the browser tab.

This design was chosen to ensure that a revoked or expired web device can't be extracted from a compromised browser since the server rejects returning the device ciphertext and nonce.
The design that was rejected was to store the device private keys directly in the browser's LocalStorage. This would have been possible, but would have meant that a compromised browser could have extracted the device private keys.

Code reference: https://github.com/serenity-kit/Serenity/blob/main/apps/app/utils/device/webDeviceStore.ts

## Web client

## Current state

As of today only the private keys and sessionToken are stored in the secure storage and no other data is stored locally.
